Designed - ready-mixed concrete
British Standard BS 8500-1:2002 will be used by the ready-mixed concrete industry from December 2003 (replacing BS 5328).
For flexibility in specifying and purchasing concrete, designed mixes are appropriate as they cover the application and constituent materials. It is a mix for which the purchaser is responsible for specifying the required performance and the producer is responsible for selecting the mix proportions to produce the specified performance. Effectively, the producer has responsibility for the mix design to meet the purchasers needs e.g. exposure environment, design life, strength, workability etc.
The mix is ordered by its required performance in terms of its strength class subject to any restrictions on materials, minimum or maximum cement content, maximum w/c ratio and any other properties required. The purchaser must supply all the relevant information on use to enable the producer to design the concrete accordingly.
Pre-tensioned concrete
Compressive stresses are introduced in prestressed concrete either by pre-tensioning or post-tensioning the steel reinforcement.
Concrete, although strong in compression, is weak in tension. For this reason it needs help in resisting the tensile stresses caused by bending forces from applied loads which can result in cracking and ultimately failure. In service bending stresses (tensile) can therefore be counteracted by prestressing.
In pre-tensioning the reinforcement, in the form of tendons or cables, is stretched (put into tension) across the concrete formwork before the concrete is placed. After the concrete has hardened and a suitable strength developed, the tendons are released. The tendons attempt to shorten and transfer the energy stored to the concrete through the bond between the concrete and the reinforcement. A compressive force is therefore induced into the concrete.
Prestressed concrete
Prestressed concrete is concrete where an internal stress has been introduced to put the element into compression. Tensile bending stresses due to self and applied loading are then offset by the inbuilt compression.
The prestress is introduced by tensioning steel within the concrete either before the concrete is cast (pre-tensioning) or after casting in which case ducts are cast into the section and steel tendons are then passed through the ducts, tensioned and anchored putting the concrete into compression (post-tensioning).
In reinforced concrete, reinforcement in the form of steel bars or mesh is placed in areas where tensile stresses will occur under load. The reinforcement is strong in tension and is able to absorb the stresses developing in the concrete so long as a good bond between the concrete and steel is maintained. By limiting the stresses that the steel has to deal with, the cracking in to concrete can be kept with-in acceptable limits.
In prestressed concrete, the compressive stresses introduced into areas where tensile stresses develop under load will resist or annul these tensile stresses. So the concrete beam behaves as if it has a high tensile strength of its own. Provided the tensile stresses do not exceed to pre-compression stresses, cracking cannot occur in the bottom of the beam.
Flooring concrete
Concrete for flooring needs to have particular properties to cope with the wear and tear of the traffic, both foot and vehicular. In addition to this abrasion resistance a floor may need to be especially flat or level e.g. to cope with racking systems in warehouses, be decorative in areas of public access or have a surface finish with appropriate resistance to slip.
To provide a floor that will give satisfactory performance, these factors must be considered at the design, production and construction stages.
There are many systems and approaches to construction of floors, all of which have particular merits depending on the desired specification.
Concrete - normal types
Concrete can be classified in many ways. For the majority of applications, the following headings are applicable; reinforced, unreinforced, lightweight, heavyweight, prestressed, and air entrained concrete.
Where the characteristics of a concrete need to be modified beyond these normal types, specialist additives, admixtures, cements and aggregates can be used to enhance or the provide the specified properties.
Imprinted concrete paving
Imprinted (or Pattern Imprinted or Stamped) Concrete is a popular decorative technique for driveways, patios and paths. Imprinted concrete is not suitable for medium-to-high speed vehicular traffic applications, such as roadways, as the finished surface is too uneven. Many different patterns for the finished slab are available, though the most popular would appear to be ashlar stone, cobbles and herringbone brick. The process involves laying the concrete slab, applying a surface colour in powder form and then imprinting a pattern in the surface by means of special textured mats. Once the concrete has gained sufficient strength, the surface is sealed. 
Colours tend to be somewhere in the black-brown-buff-red part of the spectrum, although there are greens and blues. Often a lighter shade and a darker shade are combined to give the impression of extra ´depth´ to the surfacing. For example, an ashlar stone effect surface might feature a darker brown base colour with ´highlights´ done in a buff. 
This is not really a job suitable for the DIY enthusiast as it requires specialist tools. The pattern mats are relatively expensive and are intended for many re-uses. However, some suppliers/franchisees are willing to hire out their mats and supply colour hardeners etc. for one-off projects. 
Post-tensioned concrete
Compressive stresses are introduced in prestressed concrete either by pre-tensioning or post-tensioning the steel reinforcement. Concrete, although strong in compression, is weak in tension. For this reason it needs help in resisting tensile stresses caused by bending forces from applied loads which can result in cracking and ultimately failure. In service bending stresses (tensile) can be counteracted by prestressing.
For post-tensioning the reinforcement is not normally in the form of a metal bar and a tendon or cable is normally used. In post-tensioning the concrete is cast around tubes or ducts which will contain the reinforcing tendon. Once a suitable concrete strength has developed, the tendonsare threaded through the ducts and stretched (put into tension).
This is achieved by anchoring the tendons against one end of the concrete element and using hydraulic jacks to pull the tendon from the other end. The second end is then anchored and the jacks released. The tendons attempt to shorten transferring the stored energy to the concrete as a compressive force through the end anchors thus putting the concrete in compression.
The ducts are normally then filled with a cement grout to protect the steel from corrosion and to aid the transfer of the prestressing forces into the concrete. Post-tensioning can also be applied by using external bars suitably connected to the concrete section to allow the transfer of compression force. This system of ´external post-tensioning´ allows access to the reinforcing steel for inspection and monitoring.
Repair of concrete
Concrete in service will be subject to chemical and physical changes, as well as mechanical damage. Durable concrete will require little maintenance in its lifetime, however some form of repair may be necessary where workmanship or design has been inadequate and when physical damage has occured.
Repair concrete can be as follows: 
Resin mortars, generally used for small volume repairs,
Cementitious or polymer-modified mortars or concretes for extensive patch repairs,
For large volume repair, re-casting behind formwork is used, alternatively a sprayed concrete.
Decorative concrete
The appearance of concrete is very important. The visual impact of any material is through its texture, colour and shape. With careful mix proportioning, production control and construction techniques, the versatility of concrete allows almost any form to be cast and finished.
Many concrete products mimic traditional building materials e.g. cast stone for stonework, imprinted/patterned/impressed concrete for flagstones and other affects (see separate entry Impressed concrete), and polished concrete for marble. Concrete can be produced in almost any colour and whether the surface is smooth, etched or heavily tooled, the range of decorative concrete is extensive.
Road concrete
Concrete used in the construction of roads and airfield runways and aprons is not unlike that used in other building or civil engineering projects.
However, the specification of concrete has been developed through government agencies such as the British Airports Authority, Ministry of Defence, and Highways Agency. These organisations have developed a different approach to the design and testing of roads and airfields to suit such items as; the plant and equipment used in construction, variability of traffic loading, the unique in-service conditions and needs of vehicle and aircraft traffic and the environment in which the concrete is situated.
Sprayed concrete - shotcrete - gunite
Sprayed concrete (also known as shotcrete and gunite) is a process by which concrete or mortar is conveyed through a hose and projected pneumatically at high velocity from a nozzle into its final location. The approach is used for both new construction (such as in situ linings for tunnels) and for repairs. No other compaction is required but the surface may be finished by hand if required.
Two different processes are used, either the wet process or the dry process. In the wet process, all the concrete constituents are batched and mixed together before being fed into a pump. The mixed concrete is conveyed under pressure to the nozzle where compressed air is injected, firing the concrete into position. In the dry process, only the dry ingredients are batched together and pumped under pressure to the nozzle. Pressurised water is introduced at the nozzle, which, along with the force from the pump, projects the concrete into the area being repaired. The addition of water is therefore under the control of the nozzle operator in the dry mix process and the end product tends to be more variable. 
Concrete for pumping
The concrete mix design must be correctly proportioned so that the concrete will flow easily and uniformly through the pipe-line. The pipe diameter should be 3.5 to 4 times greater than the maximum aggregate size in the concrete. This helps ensure that the pipeline will not become blocked. Another factor in mix design is the consitency (slump or flow test) of the concrete. A higher consistency will allow the concrete to move more readily within the pump and pipe-line. However, an excessively high slump can cause the concrete to segregate resulting in plugs of coarse dry material in the pump or pipe-line, the paste beign squeezed out.
What makes concrete pumpable? Pumpable concrete must be capable of being pushed under pressure through a pipe-line as a cylinder, separated from the pipe wall by a lubricating layer of mortar (water, cement, and sand). A concrete mix must be such that the concrete can pass through reducers in the pipeline system, and can go around bends in the line. In order to obtain this type of pumpability, the mix must be dense, cohesive, and have a sufficient paste and mortar fraction to minimise voidage. The mortar volume required depends on the line size, efficiency of concrete pump, and pressure available for pumping the concrete.
Foamed concrete - Applications
Foamed concrete is a versatile material.It is possible to produce with pigments, accelerators, retarders, fibres, fast setting cements, pozzolanic cements, recycled fillers and rheology controllers to tailor the workability, strength development rate and other properties to suit a wide range of applications.
Its traditional use is for trench reinstatements, as it is self-compacting (eliminating the ‘white finger’ vibration exposure problem of compacting conventional granular fill), does not settle and its load-spreading characteristics prevent direct transmission of axial loads to services. Its ability to flow easily under its self-weight has led to its use in void filling, including old sewerage pipes, wells, cellars and basements of old buildings, storage tanks, tunnels and subways.
Because of its good thermal properties, foamed concrete has been used as an insulating material on roofs, in housing foundations and floors. Its iinherent fire resistance has also been exploited in a wide range of uses, such as tilt-up firewalls, vaults etc. Foamed concrete has also been used successfully in bridge foundations, instead of other backfill materials or to provide soil stability on embankment slopes and enhance its bearing capacity with cast-in-place foamed concrete ‘piles’.
Other applications include precast elements, in raft foundations of houses, as a foundation-layer for sports fields and athletic tracks, for annulus grouting of segmental tunnels, backfilling the voids behind tunnel linings, providing base for storage tanks or as blinding material.
Roller compacted
Roller compacted concrete takes its name from the construction method used to place it. It has the same basic ingredients as conventional concrete but it is a much drier mix. It is stiff enough to be placed with conventional asphalt paving equipment and then compacted with a roller. The low water content means that high strengths can be achieved with relatively low cement contents.
The technique was developed originally in Canada in the 1970s, where it was used for the construction of large storage and handling areas for the timber industry. Since then it has been used for a range of similar large area paving applications and, in multiple layers, for the construction of gravity dams.
